Install Django
To see Pipenv in action, let’s create a new directory and install Django. First, navigate
to the Desktop, create a new directory django, and enter it with cd.
Command Line
$ cd ~/Desktop
$ mkdir django
$ cd django
Now use Pipenv to install Django.
Chapter 1: Initial Set Up 13
Command Line
$ pipenv install django==3.0
If you look within our directory, there are now two new files: Pipfile and Pipfile.lock.
We have the information we need for a new virtual environment but we have not
activated it yet. Let’s do that with pipenv shell.
Command Line
$ pipenv shell
If you are on a Mac you should now see parentheses around the name of your current
directory on your command line which indicates the virtual environment is activated.
Since we’re in a django directory that means we should see (django) at the beginning
of the command line prompt.
Note that due to an open bug Windows users will not see visual feedback of the virtual
environment at this time. But if you can run django-admin startproject in the next
section then you know your virtual environment has Django installed properly.
Command Line
(django) $
This means it’s working! Create a new Django project called test_project with the
following command. Don’t forget that period . at the end.
Command Line
(django) $ django-admin startproject test_project .
It’s worth pausing here to explain why you should add a period (.) to the command.
If you just run django-admin startproject test_project then by default Django will
create this directory structure:
Chapter 1: Initial Set Up 14
Layout
└── test_project
├── manage.py
└── test_project
├── __init__.py
├── settings.py
├── urls.py
└── wsgi.py
See how it creates a new directory test_project and then within it a manage.py file
and a test_project directory? That feels redundant to me since we already created
and navigated into a django directory on our Desktop. By running django-admin
startproject test_project . with the period at the end–which says, install in the
current directory–the result is instead this:
Layout
├── manage.py
└── test_project
├── __init__.py
├── settings.py
├── urls.py
└── wsgi.py
The takeaway is that it doesn’t really matter if you include the period or not at the
end of the command, but I prefer to include the period and so that’s how we’ll do it in
this book.
Chapter 1: Initial Set Up 15
As you progress in your journey learning Django, you’ll start to bump up more and
more into similar situations where there are different opinions within the Django
community on the correct best practice. Django is eminently customizable, which
is a great strength, however the tradeoff is that this flexibility comes at the cost of
seeming complexity. Generally speaking it’s a good idea to research any such issues
that arise, make a decision, and then stick with it!
Now let’s confirm everything is working by running Django’s local web server.
Command Line
(django) $ python manage.py runserver
Watching for file changes with StatReloader
Performing system checks...
System check identified no issues (0 silenced).
You have 17 unapplied migration(s). Your project may not work properly until
you apply the migrations for app(s): admin, auth, contenttypes, sessions.
Run 'python manage.py migrate' to apply them.
December 09, 2019 - 14:52:27
Django version 3.0, using settings 'test_project.settings'
Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
Don’t worry about the text in red about “17 unapplied migrations.” We’ll get to that
shortly but the important part, for now, is to visit http://127.0.0.1:8000/ and make
sure the following image is visible:
Chapter 1: Initial Set Up 16
Django welcome page
To stop our local server type Control+c. Then exit our virtual environment using the
command exit.
Command Line
(django) $ exit
We can always reactivate the virtual environment again using pipenv shell at any
time